Hello and welcome to this Unity Unit testing workshop.
We're going to look at my data loader Basic as an example.
Let's dig in.
So here in this demo I'm going to open up unity.
Open up our core sample project and take a look at the scene of my data loader basic.
Now the reason that I've chosen to do some sort of data loading is just to talk about, well, what
if our unit tests, which we hope are very dependable and isolated and run quickly for the sake of our
own testing methodologies?
What if they depend on other systems, like how do we know that we're able to test just one part?
In general, unit testing is testing a single unit, which you could think of as one method of one class.
But often our code is multiple classes depending together, and that can be a challenge for deciding
how to separate them and test them in isolation.
Also, you could have a system that depends on something asynchronous, like rendering graphics, rendering
audio, or in this case, calling a back end server.
So I created a very simple example here that loads data you pass in a URL, it just calls some web page
and gets back the text of that web page.
So this is the simplest example, but you could imagine that this is any server logic calling to send
a high score from your game, calling to load player data, something related to multiplayer.
Perhaps all of those could depend on some asynchronous network traffic.
Let's take a look.
So here we are in the sample.
We've got my data loader basic.
Load it up.
Let's hit play.
In this particular demo.
There's not too real interesting things in this particular demo.
There's not anything too interesting happening at gameplay.
We'll go to the console here and see this scene has no UI.
See the unity console, and then it's just showing the length of what is returned from the server.
Anything not zero signifies hey, it loaded a page.
So very light.
Simple test.
I don't have error checking or these kinds of things built in.
It just assumes success for the sake of the simplicity of this demo.
If you're doing production code and you're calling servers, you'd want to add a lot more functionality
to it.
So that's the runtime experience, which is pretty simple and not that interesting.
Now if we look at the test runner here, we can set our category to be my data loader basic.
So it just shows us the tests related to this particular code.
And then we hit our edit mode.
Here again we have play mode but you can explore that on your own.
I find for this particular demo that edit mode is more interesting.
So I'm going to hit run all.
And we can see we've got success.
This says load async result contains doctype when is loaded.
So let's take a look at a little bit of that.
We'll go here and do open our source.
And here's the test.
It is showing that first we create an instance of our data loader basic.
Then we listen for when it gets loaded.
We'll check on the data loaded back from the server.
Again, this is just calling a web page, and whatever the web page source code is returning it as a
big blob of text.
So it's going to look like some HTML stuff.
And as I looked at it while I was creating this, I noticed that it said doctype as part of it.
So Doctype is not something super significant, certainly not in the unity world, but I just thought
it was some little test that tells me did I get something back from a web page?
You can imagine testing for any other substring that makes sense for you.
Then finally, I do the action here that we're testing upon, and I load the asynchronous call there
and pass in the URL.
Now notice the URL is the URL of the GitHub page, but that's not so important if there's nothing unique
there.
If you wanted to test like the google.com it will just go and call google.com and get the the source
code back from that.
I don't really want to focus on what I'm doing here in the production code, because it's an admittedly
simple example.
I just wanted it to be a way to get something asynchronous happening inside unity.
So let's look at the source code just so we understand.
Here.
What we're doing.
When I call load, I just say, hey, make sure that the URL is not empty.
Then I go ahead and I use Unity's web request, which is built in functionality.
I call send request on that, and then I set the result to be the download handler's text.
This is just a super cheap, easy way.
Recommended by unity to call simple data online.
Very simple and straightforward.
Now this brings up a question what actually are we testing here?
I have a custom class called my data loader, but inside I'm heavily depending on some existing unity
functionality of unity web request.
Then I'm calling some web page in this case GitHub.
And that's involved.
If GitHub was somehow down for the day, this test would fail.
Is that appropriate?
If my unit test is really about testing my own methodology, my own functionality, I shouldn't consider
it a failed test.
If some unrelated dependency fails.
But here that's the case.
I would fail if GitHub was down.
Also, inside here I'm using Unity web request that's built in functionality by unity.
We hope that it works 100% of the time in all situations, but it's possible that my code works and
its code doesn't work.
So there's a gray area here.
When you think about designing your classes and then designing the tests on those classes, how do you
know what you should actually focus on?
Testing, generally speaking.
And there's books and books written on this subject of how to approach the art of unit testing.
But generally speaking, you want to reduce your dependencies down, and you want to simplify the number
of code lines that you're testing.
So less code is better because it's more simple and focused and you know exactly in isolation which
code you're testing on.
So this isn't a perfect example, but for us, it's a great way to get started and just talk about asynchronous
code running.
So for now we'll end this example.